# Introduction and Help for TaxonPages
(tag-line option here?)

Welcome to general help for TaxonPages. This document serves to introduce you to the features and design elements found in websites created using 
TaxonPages software, a Companion product to TaxonWorks. Please review the following diagram that illustrates a) where the data are gathered, 
b) where the data get displayed for public access, and c) what software and services make it possible 
to _gather_ and _display_ this information.

[The TaxonWorks, Taxon Pages, and Species File Group Services World](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/wlu2n1)


## Overview of the TaxonPages User Interface
In the current standard package for TaxonPages software, any TaxonWorks project using TaxonPages code to generate a website gets 3 standard pages.

|standard pages|expected content|customizable<br/>content (yes / no)|
|:-------------------:|----------------------------------------------|:------------:|
|**Home**| offers a **Search-by-taxon** option and information to introduce your visitors and community to your website| yes |
|**TaxonPage**| shows results of any **Search-by-taxon** in default **Panels**| yes |
|**About**| a page designed for you to provide more information of your choosing | yes |

**Home** and **About** pages content (generated in **[markdown](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/lesson/1/)**) can be customized as your group wishes 
and you can make these changes yourself. As a Species File Group **Service** we can help you learn how to do this, after initial setup. 
The **TaxonPage** search results show content in **Panels** each offering distinct data designed to help answer specific questions (e. g. 
What are all the valid names and synonyms for taxa in a given genus? or What are all the literature references for this particular taxon name?). 
Features and functions on this TaxonPage will change as more code is added. Right now, projects can:
- create new pages (beyond Home and About),
- pull data from other soruces to be displayed in the **Contents** Panel (e. g. GBIF, iNat, Plazi, etc).
- develop new Panel sections to be rendered on a Search results page, (e. g. to pull in data from other sources, if desired (e. g. GBIF, iNat, Plazi, etc). 

You can expect more data pulled in from their TaxonWorks Projects in the future.

## Anatomy of TaxonPages 
### Home Page 
[Home Search]( https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/42v5n6)  
[Home Content](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/dsy8jj)

1. Each Project edits text in each section of the **Home** Page. TaxonWorks provides a [_boiler plate template_](LINK to SAMPLE HOME BOILER PLATE MD file?) to get you started.
2. To **Search**, visitors enter the taxon name of their choice. If you search using a partial string, the software will provide any matching options for you to choose from. You will see Taxon Names followed by a check mark (✔) indicating valid names or a red cross (❌) indicating invalid names. Some Names have a [c] which corresponds to Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) created for a new combination of a Taxon Name. Combinations are considered as a separate class of name attached to a valid or invalid protonym in TaxonWorks.

### TaxonPage Search Results
Once a visitor to the site performs a search, the results display in a **Taxon Page** consisting of individual **Panels** each showing a distinct type of information. Current **Panels** generated by TP software, pull data from TaxonWorks to display on the website.

- Images of the taxa (if any), with any metadata
- Type information
- Nomenclature
- Nomenclature references
- A searchable map showing (if any) **asserted distribution**, specimen **collection objects**, and **type material** information
- Name descendants and synonyms
- Lifezone and ecology data
- Stats
- Customizable Additional Content (added by each Project)

[Sample Whole Search Page Result for_Adelosgryllus rubricephalus_](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/e5ed4c)

#### TaxonPage Panel Sections
##### Top Panel Section
At the top of the **Search Results** Page, please see features found in the following screenshot and explained below.

[Top of Search Results Page]( https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/ubbbz1)

- In the **Header menu** you see the Project Icon in the top left corner and Project Name. Both of these are hyperlinked back to the **Home** page when you click.
- In the top right, note links to **Home** and **About** pages.
- The **moon** icon,when clicked, changes the pages look to **dark mode**. Click it again to change the mode back again.
- Under the **Header menu** you find the current **classification hierarchy** which can be clicked to move up / down the taxonomic groups.
- To the right of the **classification hierarchy** note that you can again, **Search** as you wish.
- Just below **Search** you see two options: **Sitemap** and **DwC** (aka Darwin Core).

##### Image Panel
If images exist for this taxonomic group, they display in the top left. You can scroll across to see more of them. Hovering over a thumbnail will display any image metadata. Clicking on an image in the main window enlarges the image and displays the metadata and allows you to use arrows to scroll forward and backward through the images.

[Image Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/42tll4)

##### Type Specimen Panel
This panel shows any type information for this taxa if it exists.
[Type Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/ylbp5n)

##### Nomenclature Panel
Information in this panel includes all names, ordered by year.
[Nomenclature Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/4t7y22)

##### Nomenclature References
[Nomenclature References](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/rfgpk5)
[Nomenclature References in JSON Format](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/p7vehd)

##### Searchable Map Panel
Potentially, three kinds of data get shown in a map for a given taxa. In our example here, we see summarized **asserted distribution data**, **collection objects** with this name applied, and **type specimen** locality noted.

[Map Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/onbbue)

In the top right of the Map, you can click to do a spatial search of the data.

[Search in Map Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/vu4ix7)

##### Descendants and Synonyms Panel
If Descendants and Synonyms exist for a given taxon, they show up here. You can click entries in the list to jump to those names.
[Panel Showing Descendants and Synonyms](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/l6njye )

##### Custom Content Panel
Here, a project can customize pullingn in data from other places (TaxonWorks included, but perhaps GBIF, or iNat, or Plazi, or GloBI). Our example shows that sound files for this taxa are available.
[Custom Content Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/0qf0r6)

##### Stats Panel
[Stats Panel](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/r0mxo5)

##### Footer with citation, terms of use, software, services information
When setting up the website for to grab data from your TaxonWorks Project to display using TaxonPages software, you will need to supply some **configuration** information. This includes what your Project will use for its preferred **citation/s** as well as your **terms of use** guidance including **copyright licensing.** The Species File Group currently suggests CCBY or CC0 (strongly preferring CC0). Other licences are supported for now, however, this is expected to change in the next 3 years when we will require CCBY or CC0 to provide continued support and services to produce these pages.
[Footer Section](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/1q8zzp)

### Search Results by Page, by Panel, via JSON TaxonWorks API
#### Get data for a given Panel
Example, get data for a given section using the **hamburger** menu (see stacked lines) that gives you two options
1. **Show all** (toggles back to **Show less**) in case there are more data in that section.
2. Get the data for a given panel, in Java Script Object Notation (JSON). See screen shot.
[Where to find **Show All** and **JSON Data** option](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/wbbmk1)

#### Data for a given entire Page in DwC or JSON formats

- Sample DwC Data Set. Note the data format uses "Tabs" to separate the data fields. You'll need to use "Import from text" in programs like Excel to get the data to parse correctly inside the spreadsheet. (In other words, double-clicking won't parse the data into columns correctly when the file is opened).
- Sample JSON

#### Data for a given page or section using Sitemap access to the API

[Sitemap](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/zgxo2e)

### About Page
[Customizable About Page](https://sfg.taxonworks.org/s/5ybuzw)

1. Each Project edits text in each section of their **About** Page. TaxonWorks provides a [_boiler plate template_](LINK to SAMPLE ABOUT BOILER PLATE MD file?) to get you started.

### Images you want on Home or About Pages
For any images / logos you might want to upload to your **Home** or **About** pages, please upload them to your (??? TaxonWorks Project and then link to them using the URL to the original image, or medium, or thumbnail provided by TaxonWorks).

Goal to provide ..  
Keep these pages light  
Answers to questions anticipated and not  
We are providing panels that answer one or more questions  
	- raw data that feeds into it all come from any resource, not just TaxonWorks

Public view  
Smart search  
Conventions on validity of taxonomic names  
Type specimens  
Interactive map  

Companion Software Documentation  
TaxonWorks docs.taxonworks.org  
Global Names  
Catalog of Life  

---

--- **SEPARATE MARKDOWN PAGE** ---

# Deploy and Configure Details

# Panels can be configured
	- which panels are present or absent (maybe a whole section on panels)
	- where to edit on / off
	- where to edit / confiture your markdown page

# Deploy Taxon Pages section
	- deploy locally on your own computer, share with collaborators, share data in a new way
		- (your computer needs to be on)
	- GitHub pages option, Heroku?, ...
	- Or find a willing provider, not us
	- (Or possibly pay us, some time in the future).



